hey this is presh tall walker there are
seven doors in a line a mouse starts in
the middle at door four at doors one and
seven are cats every day the mouse moves
one door left or right randomly each
direction with an equal 50% chance we
can illustrate one path of the mouse as
follows if the mouse reaches a door with
the cat door one or door seven the game
ends as the cat catches the mouse in
this example the mouse is caught on day
five the question is what is the average
number of days until the mouse is caught
I think Josh for this problem and I
think folky for emailing it to me can
you figure it out give this problem a
try and when you're ready keep watching
the video where I will present two
different solutions I'm going to present
two solutions to this problem I'll first
go over a standard textbook method that
is quite complicated but it's useful to
learn to solve other more challenging
problems
I'll also present a trick using symmetry
where you can find the answer
very simply the first method is an
example of an absorbing Markov chain an
absorbing state is one that once reached
cannot be left in this game both doors 1
& 7 are absorbing States the other
method is to use symmetry to derive
simple linear equations and you'll see
by contrast how the second method is
much faster than the first method but
let's get started with the absorbing
Markov chain here are the steps
well first create a state diagram that
shows the possible states and transition
probabilities between them well then
write the transition matrix and put it
in canonical form
well then calculate the mean time to
absorption I'm going to present a how-to
for solving this problem and see the
video description for a link to the
proof of why this method works and if
none of what I said makes any sense to
you don't worry I'm gonna go over this
slowly so you can follow along and
understand this method so first let's
create a state diagram that shows the
possible states and transition
probabilities between them
this game has seven doors so we'll call
those seven states now what are the
transition probabilities between the
states well if you're at door one you
will always stay at door one this is a
hundred percent chance that you're stuck
in door one because the mouse is caught
the same thing goes for door seven now
for any of the interior doors there's a
50% chance of going left or right so
from door to there's a 50% chance the
mouse goes left to door one and a 50%
chance the mouse goes right to door
three and this is true for each of the
interior doors so from each of these
doors we have arrows going left and
right with the 50% chance in each
direction we now need to write a
transition matrix corresponding to the
state diagram as we have seven states we
need a seven by seven matrix where the
IJ entry is the probability of going
from door I to door J so we'll write
this in as follows each row I will
represent the transition probabilities
for that door so the first row should
correspond to the transition
probabilities for door 1 well where can
you go from door 1 you can only go to
door 1 so the first entry 1 1 new
to be the hundred percent probability
that it's an absorbing state you can't
go anywhere else
so all of the other columns will be zero
so that's the first row what about the
second row we need to analyze door -
well from door - there's a 50% chance
you can go to door one so we need the
first column to be 0.5 there's no chance
that you stay at door - but there is a
50% chance that you could go to door 3
there's no chance you could go to any of
the other doors so the remaining entries
in this row are zero now the third row
will correspond to door 3 here there's a
50% chance of going to door 2 and then
there's a 50% chance of going to door 4
and all of the other entries are 0 we
can use the same method to fill in the
rest of the entries in this matrix and
we get all the way to door 7 where
there's only a 100% chance of staying in
door 7 so the very last entry in row 7
column 7 is 1 so we now have a
transition matrix but we want to put it
in a nicer form in what's known as a
canonical form to create a matrix P we
do this by rearranging the rows and or
columns in the following form so P needs
to be matrix where we have a upper left
block Q an upper right block are the
lower left block needs to be 0 and the
lower right block needs to be an
identity matrix so what does that mean
for the matrix we've created well
essentially we want the identity matrix
to be in the bottom right so we're going
to rearrange the rows and columns to put
this one from the very first row into
the sixth row so let's rearrange these
rows and columns so first I'll rearrange
this first column to put it into the
sixth column Mac
I'm going to put this first row as the
sixth row so we now have the matrix P in
canonical form you'll notice we have a
matrix of all zeros in the bottom left
we have an identity matrix in the bottom
right here is our matrix R and here is
our matrix Q now from experience you'll
be able to write P in canonical form
immediately from the state diagram you
won't have to go through the process we
did where we came up with some
transition matrix and then had to
rearrange the rows and column but I
wanted to demonstrate this process in
case you started with the transition
matrix that was not in canonical form so
we can now proceed as follows q is a
five by five matrix from Q we can
calculate the fundamental matrix n as
equal to the inverse of the identity
matrix minus Q in other words we take
the identity matrix with five rows and
five columns and we subtract Q and we
end up with the following five by five
matrix we need to take the inverse of
this matrix you can use your favorite
method to invert this matrix such as a
numerical solver when you do that you
get the following result now the mean
time to absorption from each state will
be found by taking this matrix and
multiplying it by a column vector which
has one in each of the five rows so we
calculate the mean time to absorption by
taking n multiplied by this column
vector of one and we get five eight nine
eight and five and this will be the mean
time to absorption from doors two three
four five and six so to solve the
problem we recall the female starts in
door four so reading this column vector
it takes an average of nine days until
the mouse is caught
so we found the answer and we also
figured out the mean time to absorption
from any of the other doors but is there
a simpler way to solve this problem
I'll now present a method that uses
symmetry so we have the same transition
state diagram as before but look at this
diagram and notice the symmetry from the
middle by symmetry doors 2 & 6 should
have the same expected time to
absorption will call this expected time
e 1 similarly by symmetry tours 3 & 5
should have the same expected time to
absorption will call this expected time
e 2 finally will supposed or 4 has an
expected time to absorption equal to e 3
we can interpret e a as the expected
time to absorption or I is equal to the
minimum distance to doors 1 or 7 another
way of looking at this is let's real
Abel our state diagram as follows we
have the two doors where the cats are as
X's these are the states here absorbed
and then we write 1 2 3 2 & 1
for the interior doors in this way eaj
is the expected time to absorption from
the number I in the above diagram this
model is also an absorbing Markov chain
but it involves only four states instead
of seven states so how will this help us
well let's start if you're at a door
with the label of 3 from the label 3
after one day the mouse always moves to
a label of 2 where the expected waiting
time is then e 2 so we figured out the
expected waiting time from 3 is equal to
1 which is 1 day plus the expected
waiting time from 2
next if you're at a door with the label
of two after one day the mouse has a 50%
chance to be at the label 3 where the
expected waiting time is e 3 and a 50%
chance to be at a label of 1 with an
expected waiting time II 1 so we can
write the following equation e 2 is
equal to 1 day plus 0.5 times e 3 plus
0.5 times e 1 finally if we're at a door
with the label of 1 after one day the
mouse has a 50% chance to be caught and
a 50% chance to be at a label of 2 where
the expected waiting time is then e 2 so
we can write the equation e 1 is equal
to 1 plus 0.5 times e 2 so we have three
equations and three variables and we can
solve these equations very simply how
can we do that
well let's substitute the first equation
into the second equation and let's
substitute the third equation into the
second equation we now end up with an
equation that only has a two we can
solve that e to is equal to 8 we then
substitute back into the first equation
to get III is equal to 9 and then we
substitute into the third equation to
get a 1 is equal to 5 and we've solved
it the mouse starts in the middle which
is a door with the label 3 so it takes
nine days on average for the mouse to be
caught we found the answer much quicker
than using the transition matrix method
and we got the exact same result so this
is usually the part of the video where I
ask did you figure it out now if I don't
ask this question everyone says I wanted
you to say did you figure it out but if
I ask it some people who are watching
these videos for the first time Gale its
patronizing as if I solved these
problems and I want to ask did you
figure
that's not the case if you watch my
videos you'll see there many puzzles
that I present that I cannot solve so I
only mean this in jest and I will not
say did you figure it out
if you guys don't want me to I thank you
for watching this video and I'm going to
end on a personal note since 2014 I
posted 1 to 2 math videos per week
that you can watch for free with no
delays for sick days vacations or
personal life events so far I've also
declined all sponsors you'll see
sponsors on many YouTube channels so far
I've declined them for very important
reasons so how can you help support this
channel and bring amazing math videos to
everyone here are some of the ways
please subscribe for free to get the
newest videos that's one of the best
ways and it's a free way that you can
show support for this channel I also ask
that you watch and share mind your
decision videos it'll help more people
come to this channel if you have a math
topic or a puzzle you can email me presh
at mind your decisions comm i get
contributions from all around the world
you can also read my books there are
links in the video description they're
also great as gifts finally if you so
choose you can support this channel
financially on patreon and as a small
things I'll try and give you exclusive
content like sneak peeks of future
videos and they'll always respond to you
first thanks for watching and thank you
for your support